Dear young people, I’m sure you all know
this passage well – the one from Holy
Scripture, from the Gospel according to
John, known as the High Priestly Prayer.
Why is it that we hear precisely this
passage on the eve of the feast of
Pentecost, when for these last few
Sundays Jesus has been continually
taking his leave of his disciples,
and we know this text came about
at the moment of the Last Supper?
And why is it that, just before the
feast and solemnity of Pentecost, we
hear these farewell words of Jesus?
First of all, we know that among
the Jews only the priest could enter
the Temple to pray for the people.
Here, if you were listening
carefully, Jesus speaks and addresses
the Father not only for himself.
Jesus prays both for those whom God has
already given him and for those who will
come after them – that is, for all of us.
Jesus intercedes in advance for all
of us, and in doing so he shows this
dimension of his too: that he is a priest.
For if, in the Jewish tradition, only a
priest could enter the Temple and plead
on behalf of the people, here we see Jesus
doing precisely that for every one of us.
He prays ahead of time.
What does Jesus pray for?
What did he pray for in this prayer?
He prayed for three things.
He prayed about what we struggle
with most today, and he prayed
for what affects us most deeply.
He prayed, first and foremost, for unity.
Secondly, he prayed for our
sanctification, and thirdly
he prayed again for unity.
You see, Jesus begins by
praying for unity in the Church.
If the Church were just a church – merely
a group of people who gather here or
elsewhere in the world simply because of
certain beliefs and certain commandments
– then it would not be Christ’s Church.
Because we see that when Jesus
prays, when he turns to the Father,
the Father gives everything to him,
and Jesus gives it back to him.
And here they speak about their
communion within the Holy Trinity.
The first thing we can learn tonight from
this passage is the relationship within
the Holy Trinity: an unceasing giving.
And the Holy Spirit is that love that
flows from the Father and the Son, the
love that binds everything together.
And that’s why Jesus doesn’t want
a Church that’s cold, a Church that
isn’t connected, a Church that’s
just about rules and some shared
standards we happen to believe in.
No—Jesus wants us, if we want
to be authentic witnesses,
to be like the Holy Trinity.
We must be filled with
that love of God—that’s it.
On the eve of Pentecost, Jesus
prays that the Holy Spirit
would unite all Christians.
Can we say this picture tonight, here:
that we’re all connected in spirit?
Jesus isn’t asking that we instantly
love every baptised person we see that
much, but that we be spiritually united.
Because Jesus prays for unity.
What is it that tears the Church apart,
what tears our parish communities
apart, what tears our choirs apart,
what—what tears apart our prayer, erm,
groups in the parishes, I don’t know.
Disunity, jealousy, envy, slander.
That is not the Spirit of God.
Even within the Church itself
you can see how some, in their
ministry, are serving that evil
spirit more than the Holy Spirit.
Because the Holy Spirit is not jealous.
The Holy Spirit unites.
And look at the history of the Church—how
many divisions there have been, how many
sins were committed precisely because we
weren’t united, we didn’t bear witness.
You now have families in Croatia
who, within themselves, are no
longer a little holy Church.
Because you have some who
believe and some who don’t.
Today you have sacramental marriages.
You know that in the sacrament of
marriage, it says they become one.
Yet you have those who have
just got married and have
never, spiritually, become one.
They became one on paper.
And it is precisely Jesus’ desire – where
he intercedes and prays – first and
foremost for the unity of the Church
as his Body, and that unity can be
brought about only by the Holy Spirit.
And so the first thing he prays for
is that we may all become one, just as
the relationship between him and the
Father is, where the Holy Spirit flows
and binds everything together, and
which is shown in unceasing communion.
That’s why this communion matters
so much to Jesus, because he knew
where the devil would strike hardest.
Whenever the devil wants to destroy
something, he sows division, he
brings unrest, he stirs up gossip, he
breeds jealousy—because in that way,
if a person isn’t open to the grace
of the Holy Spirit, they’ll start
listening to these other spirits.
Secondly, Jesus says that he is going
away, and that we are not of this world.
So, elsewhere, alongside that unity,
Jesus also prays for our sanctification.
How does he put it: “You are in the
world, but you are not of this world”?
So, because Jesus knows that, yes,
we live in this world, he prays
for the gift of the Holy Spirit to
be given to us, because the Holy
Spirit sets us apart from this world.
If we are not open to the
Holy Spirit, then we draw
from the spirit of this world.
OK, Jesus is God.
He lived in this world, but
he never belonged to it.
Jesus himself was, all the time, waiting
for his departure, and that’s why he says:
“I am going to prepare a place for you.”
We are here right now, but spiritually we
can be set apart if we are God’s children,
if we are filled with the Holy Spirit.
And that’s why Jesus says we are in this
world, but we are not of this world.
In other words, he means we don’t
identify with the spirit of this world.
That’s the problem today.
So, many people open themselves up to
all sorts of spirits of this world.
Many people are filled with, I don’t
know, all sorts of different spirits.
I always say: everyone is spiritual;
it’s just a question of which
spirit they’re filled with.
Even those who say they’re
Christians and believers.
But I always say the measure of that
is the fruit of the Holy Spirit.
That’s why Jesus says, “You are in
this world, but you are not of it.”
Because God Himself, as God,
was set apart from this world.
Jesus knew what His
destination was: heaven.
And that’s why, elsewhere, He prays
for our personal sanctification;
and our personal sanctification
comes through the grace, the zeal,
and the fire of the Holy Spirit.
For when a person is filled with the
Holy Spirit, they know exactly when the
spirit of this world is attacking them.
I always say that the Holy Spirit
within us is a kind of alarm.
Whenever something worldly is false,
because the father of lies often
deceives in his own way, even through
disguised projects, ideas, erm,
visions, he finds his followers.
And then a person can throw themselves
into something, thinking they’re fighting
for it, without even realising they’re
actually fighting on the wrong side.
How often today do we see these various
initiatives, people who are, in inverted
commas, fighting for human rights,
for the dignity of this or that, and
yet in reality they’re serving the
spirit of this world, serving the
spirit of death, the spirit of murder.
I don’t, I don’t, I don’t understand
it, but sin so often blinds.
And that’s why Jesus says: “No,
no. You cannot be conformed to it.”
That isn’t the spirit of sanctification.
The spirit of sanctification is the one
who listens to my word, the one who allows
himself to be sanctified in humility.”
And that’s why, elsewhere, alongside that
communion, Jesus calls us to be sanctified
by the power of the Holy Spirit.
Because you can be in this world and
yet be filled with the Holy Spirit.
And I said that in one of my sermons.
Yesterday someone asked me on a podcast
how—how, when you’re in the faith—how
to get rid of bad people around you,
how to recognise the evil around you.
You don’t need to do anything.
Just belong to God.
Everything around you will fall away.
All the devils will leave you alone.
Just be filled with the Holy Spirit.
You’ll be a nuisance to everyone.
How will you know whether
you’re of this world or of God?
Like this: if you’re God’s, you’ll
even get on your own mum’s and
dad’s nerves—so of course you’ll
get on the devil’s nerves too, and
everyone else who works against God.
I believe, young people, that you
yourselves have experienced your
own parents saying to you: “Don’t
go overboard with your faith.
Why are you going up there every Thursday
and on Sundays, why are you always going
to church—what’s going to become of you?”
Anyone who lives by the spirit
of this world cannot understand
what spiritual hunger is.
Thank God you are hungry.
Thank God there is the Holy Spirit who
awakens in people the desire to come
to the source, to drink deeply and
to seek the fire of the Holy Spirit.
And I’m actually afraid of those
who say they wouldn’t want to overdo
it, who’ve reduced their devotion
to the bare minimum and that’s that.
Well, you’re of this world, because you
won’t let yourself be pulled away from
what’s attractive, from this world.
If spirituality is too much for you, then
ask yourself why too much money isn’t too
much, why too much career isn’t too much.
That’s why you’re hungry, you
gorge yourself, you work yourself
to death twenty-four hours a day.
That’s not a problem for you, but
if you go to Mass twice on a Sunday,
or to some prayer meeting, there you
go—people say you’ve gone completely mad.
Better to be mad about
Jesus than about Satan.
Today, many are mad about the devil,
running after him, and they’re
not even aware of it because they
don’t see who they’re chasing.
For behind the devil there’s
always something hidden — something
he’s used to hook them.
And now you can imagine: he just
keeps shifting those boundaries.
Where does this hunger for the world end?
Wars are fought, and the innocent suffer.
Why?
Because of the curse, because of hunger,
because of greed, because of power.
That is the spirit of this world.
That is Satan’s instrument.
So, dear young people, don’t be afraid.
Don’t be afraid when they call
you out, when they mock you.
“Have peace in your heart, for
I am not of this world,” say.
I am in it, but I long for
higher, heavenly gifts.
I long for eternal life.
I long for peace in my heart.
I long for a clear conscience.
To be able to lie down in bed.
I long to be able to look every
brother and sister in the eye
with love, to hate no one.
I want my spiritual life to be in order.
When they offer you all this wealth of
the world, every kind of power, money and
everything else, people, be on your guard.
Be on your guard.
You will lose yourself.
Many people have lost themselves.
They’ve got everything I listed
before, but they haven’t got peace.
They’ve no time to sleep soundly.
Because, look, sometimes it seems
people use us, and sometimes we think
we’re naïve just because we’re good.
But don’t worry: both those
who sow good and those who sow
evil—everything will be repaid;
everyone will reap what they’ve sown.
It’s only a question of when
each person will harvest.
So don’t be disappointed.
Sometimes I see Christians who are
disappointed and say, “Oh, it’s just not
worth being good, because look—everyone
tramples all over me.” They don’t.
When the time comes, Jesus
will stand up in your defence.
And I ask myself: for the one who
serves Satan, who will stand up for him?
Who?
So don’t be afraid to open yourselves
to the Holy Spirit and say, “I belong
to God.” Yes, you’re in this world,
and when they criticise you as modern
Catholics—young people—“Are you normal,
living pre-marital chastity?” We can see
it’s become something people now mock,
they sneer at it, as if you’re stupid.
Tell them, “I’m not stupid, because
I’m not just flesh and body.
I have a heart, I have a conscience,
I have morals, I have values.
I’m doing this for my own good.” Don’t
fall into temptation, because you see,
that’s exactly what Satan does too: he
often tries to convince us, through other
people, that we’re on the wrong path.
No.
Look, Jesus knew this.
That’s why Jesus prays for our
sanctification, because if we want
to live out this word of God, we
have to go against the current – and
that’s unavoidable for everyone.
And that’s why Jesus intercedes for us.
Just remember this: Jesus knew all of this
in advance, and that’s why he prayed for
all of us—for unity, for sanctification.
Thirdly, what did Jesus pray for?
He prayed for truth, that we
might remain in the truth.
He will send the Holy Spirit, he says, to
lead us into all truth—and not everyone in
the world can recognise the Holy Spirit.
I can’t.
At the start of Mass I said: the worst
kind of people are those who have their
eyes open, but their hearts closed.
Nothing gets through to them.
So, in this world we constantly
keep our eyes on the lookout.
We’re always guarding against enemies,
watching out for—say—competition at work.
You watch this, you watch that,
so you don’t make a mistake.
We’ve got our eyes wide open like
this, staring—but it does you no good.
That’s useful for the rat race
in this world, but you need to
have your spiritual eyes open.
Have you ever wondered why, for
forty days, Jesus kept appearing to
the disciples—he’d show up and then
disappear, show up and then disappear.
Why?
He wasn’t playing hide-and-seek
with them; he wanted to get them
used to stopping looking for him
like this with their physical eyes,
and instead with spiritual eyes.
He wanted to get them used to recognising
him with the heart, in a spiritual way,
and that’s what Jesus tells us: “I will
send the Advocate, who will remain with
you — the Spirit of truth — always.”
And only those with an open heart, with
spiritual eyes opened, will be able to
recognise him — not these bulging eyes,
these greedy eyes, these eyes that are
never satisfied, that only want more,
that trample on human dignity at the
cost of excuses and lies just to please
themselves and soothe their conscience.
So, dear young people, Jesus calls us;
he tells us to remain in the truth,
and the truth is his word, his word.
And now, as we go on to look at it, Jesus
prayed for all three of those things.
Have they been fulfilled?
Yes.
But we’ll ask the question: have
they been fulfilled in our own lives?
Well, that’s different.
If we look at how Jesus prayed
for the unity of the Church.
Those fruits were seen straight
away when Jesus ascended into
heaven: the first apostles received
the gift of the Holy Spirit.
They opened themselves up and
went out into the streets.
They loved their fellow Christians so
much that they were ready to preach
at the cost of their own lives.
They were so committed to those small
churches they were founding—caring
for them, writing them letters.
Saint Paul and Saint Peter
would travel around, encouraging
them and strengthening them.
So you can see the fruit of
what Jesus prayed for in the
early Church: unity, communion.
They put everything together on
the table, shared everything, and
those fruits were already visible.
I ask myself: is that
visible among us today?
Another fruit Jesus prayed for
was that they would become holy.
Many in the early Church received gifts
of the Holy Spirit, and those gifts—along
with the grace and guidance of the Holy
Spirit—protected them from this world.
And you can see that Jesus succeeded
in praying for what he prayed for:
that they would remain in communion
and that they would remain sanctified.
And he says he also prayed that
they would remain in the truth.
Were the first apostles inspired
by the Holy Spirit and did
they write Holy Scripture?
That is the truth.
If the apostles and the first disciples
had not been open to the Holy Spirit, if
they had not written down God’s truth,
we today would not have the truth.
And that’s why it’s such a mercy
that this too was fulfilled.
And the third intention Jesus
prayed for was that my disciples
would remain in the truth.
That’s why the first disciples wrote
down his commandments, his words,
and passed them on to us today so
that we can live in the truth, so
that we can hold fast to God’s word.
And that’s why I always say: you
can’t bargain with God’s word
and with God’s commandments.
“I’ll keep this one, I’ll throw that
one out because I don’t like it.
I think this one ought to be
kept only halfway, this one
like this…” It doesn’t work.
Truth is truth.
Either you serve God’s word, the
truth, or you serve someone else.
That’s why all three of these prayers
Jesus prayed have been fulfilled.
And that’s why we’ve now got the answer
as to why, on the eve of the feast
of the coming of the Holy Spirit,
Jesus prays this priestly – this
high-priestly – prayer, where he
intercedes for his Church, for all of us.
See how powerful that is:
Jesus prayed for us in advance.
How often do we think
it all depends on us.
Come on, people, wake up.
Realise that our lives – everything
we are, everything we do – are in
God’s hands; that God, that Jesus, has
already been thinking of us, praying
in advance that trials and temptations
would pass us by, that we would remain
in communion, that we would remain
in the truth, that we would be made
holy – and not that we go and ascribe
certain realities to ourselves.
OK, we co-operate with God,
but staying on the right path
is God’s grace, God’s desire.
And as I said, let’s open
ourselves to the Holy Spirit.
None of this would have come about in the
early Church if the first disciples hadn’t
opened themselves to the Holy Spirit; and
what he prayed for was then fulfilled—what
Jesus prayed for came to pass.
Jesus is surely still praying that
we too, the Church of this century,
remain in those very same things: in
communion, sanctified, and in the truth.
I said how much of a cancer
that is in the Church.
How many poisonous tongues,
how much jealousy, how many
people stir up division.
Some people are walking
division—walking it.
Some people are walking unrest, and yet
they’re always hanging around the church.
Even here on Thursdays, how many times I’d
like to shake some of them off like slime.
Because they’re unrest—unrest.
Man, stop and stand before Jesus Christ.
Ask yourself what you’re preaching,
what you’re testifying to.
Don’t drag the name of Jesus Christ
and the faith in Jesus through the mud.
Many people use the word “Jesus”, and
“faith”, to cover up their foolishness,
to cover up their sins and disobedience.
With people like that, the best
way to check is by their obedience.
Just challenge them, warn them.
Try telling them, and
you’ll see how they hiss.
Then you’ll see that pious, counterfeit
spirit in them start to flare up.
And they often turn themselves into some
kind of “prophets of God”, handing out
their messages, advice, and I don’t know
what else. To other wounded members of
the Church who are still seeking peace
in Jesus Christ, they end up confusing
many believers who have decided to
return to Jesus Christ hurt and broken,
and with their false “truth” they
confuse them and steer them off course.
No-one else needs to guide you,
dear young people, except Jesus
Christ and the Word of God.
That is the truth in which
Jesus wants you to remain.
Don’t listen to other voices:
there are many false prophets, many
impostors who swear by God’s name, who
present themselves and put on an act.
The fruits of the Holy Spirit
can be seen in all of us.
Holiness isn’t shown on our faces, in the
sense that even false piety can be learnt.
And many today turn those little
voices into something as if
they’re working at reception.
And then when that starts up, it’s just…
Dear God, thank God for that.
Oh, Jesus, thank you.
You should, you should do it for Jesus.”
When I hear that kind of imitation
holiness, honestly, I just lose it.
Maybe there’s something wrong with me.
Then, really, there must
be something wrong with me.
I’ve been a priest for ten years and I
still haven’t got that tone of voice.
Is it me?
I don’t know what’s wrong.
But honestly, people?
Because I’m telling you, it’s not some
display of holiness and relationship
with God — all of that can be learnt.
Relationship is what I said:
you recognise it by its fruits.
Forget the imitation, forget
it — let’s be original.
Like that young lad Acutis says,
Blessed Carlo Acutis: we’re all born
originals, and we die as copies.
So let’s be original.
So, if we are—if we belong to
Jesus—we are in this world.
Let’s fight for the unity of the
Church; let’s always stand up for unity.
People, don’t give the devil any
room to sow division in the Church.
That most often happens on social
media—anywhere, really—whenever
some story gets started.
I said this once from here: what
normal believer, what normal believer
would go on social media and ask,
“What do you think of this priest?”
And by doing that you’ve set off an
avalanche of gossip and backbiting.
Sure, someone might even say
something positive about that priest.
But with that question you’ve opened
up a discussion — arguing about
someone who isn’t even present.
“What do you think of those prayer
groups?” “What do you think of this
bishop?” “What do you think of that
one?” And then some old woman pipes
up: “You lot are like devils.”
So, the moment you ask a
question like that, you’re laying
the groundwork for division.
Because one person says this,
another says that, and then they
start bickering amongst themselves
— some defending, some acting as
apologists, some this, some that.
You understand what I mean.
These are the little things where we can
all just cut it off straight away, so
that no division is created in the Church.
That’s just one example.
One example.
And there are so many ways we can
help make sure that what Jesus prayed
for — that we remain one — actually
happens: that we stay united with the
Holy Spirit and pray for the grace
and strength of the Holy Spirit.
The first Christians were so
closely united; they loved their
Christian brothers so much.
How do we talk about others – our
fellow Christian brothers – especially
those who aren’t Catholic yet?
What feelings do we have towards them?
Oof… we could do with a
prayer for forgiveness.
So, let this be an encouragement for us to
think about what really mattered to Jesus.
Jesus cared about unity,
that we pray for holiness.
So pray—and if you do notice something
that isn’t right, pray to the Holy Spirit
for communion, pray for sanctification.
In other words, let’s
not belittle one another.
The other day, after I’d been a
priest for ten years, I had a man
say to me, “You might turn out to
be something.” “Thanks,” I said.
It’s just that, you know, I’m not the
sort who needs to prove myself to people.
I know what I’m worth in God’s eyes.
And it’s the same for every person.
And when I say that to you,
you say it to me as well.
Because if someone isn’t rooted in
God, they’ll start doubting themselves.
Let’s praise one another
for what we do well.
Look—your T-shirt is lovely this year.
Someone just now commented
that it’s an ugly colour.
No—say it, and if you can’t
swallow it, at least try to force
something past those selfish lips.
Praise someone for something
they do well in the church.
You sing well, you serve well,
you clean these tiles well.
Do you know that every Saturday the
women here clean th-this church,
all of this that we mess up.
Well, you should notice it.
Yes, that’s the Spirit of God
then – when we notice in someone
else what they’re doing well for
the Body of Christ, the Church.
Look, it’s the St Anthony’s walk at the
moment, and when I see how many people
are working wholeheartedly to make it
succeed, to see it through… But there
are also those who work to sow division.
There are also those who are jealous.
There are also those who copy us.
It doesn’t matter.
Let’s just pray for unity, so
that Jesus may be glorified,
because he cares about his body.
Jesus doesn’t need buildings.
What Jesus needs is us – unity
among us and peace in our hearts.
Amen.